feat(query-tee): Extend per backend settings with request proportion and min time threshold (#13037)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/mimir/manage/tools/query-tee.md

- If the backend endpoint URL is configured only with a username, then query-tee keeps the configured username and injects the password received in the incoming request.
- If the backend endpoint URL is configured without a username and password, then query-tee forwards the authentication credentials found in the incoming request.

> ### Backend configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure the backend
```

You can configure individual backend behavior using the `-backend.config-file` flag to specify a YAML or JSON configuration file.
Each key in the configuration file corresponds to a backend hostname, and the value contains the configuration for that backend.

The following configuration options are available for each backend:

- **`request_headers`**: Additional HTTP headers to send to this backend
- **`request_proportion`**: Proportion of requests to send to this backend (0.0 to 1.0). Overrides the global `-proxy.secondary-backends-request-proportion` setting for this backend.

> - **`min_time_threshold`**: Minimum time threshold for time-based query routing (Go duration format like "24h", "168h", "1h30m"). Default is "0s" which means serve all queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `request_headers`: Additional HTTP headers to send to this backend
- `request_proportion`: Proportion of requests to send to this backend. Set between 0.0 -1.0. This value overrides the global `-proxy.secondary-backends-request-proportion` setting for this backend.
- `min_time_threshold`: Minimum time threshold for time-based query routing (Go duration format like "24h", "168h", "1h30m"). Default is "0s", which means to serve all queries.
```

> - **`min_time_threshold`**: Minimum time threshold for time-based query routing (Go duration format like "24h", "168h", "1h30m"). Default is "0s" which means serve all queries.

Reviewer 2: [nit] Maybe a name like `min_data_queried_age` would be clearer?

#### Backend configuration examples

**JSON configuration example:**

```json
{
  "prometheus-main": {
    "request_headers": {
      "X-Storage-Tier": ["main"]
    }
  },
  "prometheus-hot": {
    "request_headers": {
      "X-Storage-Tier": ["hot"],
      "Cache-Control": ["no-store"]
    },
    "request_proportion": 1.0,
    "min_time_threshold": "0s"
  },
  "prometheus-cold": {
    "request_headers": {
      "X-Storage-Tier": ["warm"],
      "Cache-Control": ["no-store"]
    },
    "request_proportion": 1.0,
    "min_time_threshold": "6h"
  }
}
```

> **YAML configuration example:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
YAML configuration example:
```

```yaml
prometheus-main:
  request_headers:
    X-Storage-Tier: ["main"]
prometheus-hot:
  request_headers:
    X-Storage-Tier: ["hot"]
    Cache-Control: ["no-store"]
  request_proportion: 1.0
  min_time_threshold: "0s" # serves all queries
prometheus-cold:
  request_headers:
    X-Storage-Tier: ["warm"]
    Cache-Control: ["no-store"]
  request_proportion: 1.0
  min_time_threshold: "6h" # 6 hours
```

> ### Backend selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Select backends
```

You can use the query-tee to either send requests to all backends, or to send a proportion of requests to all backends and the remaining requests to only the preferred backend.

> #### Request proportion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configure request proportion
```

You can configure request proportions in two ways:

1. **Global setting**: Use the `-proxy.secondary-backends-request-proportion` CLI flag to set the default proportion for all secondary backends.
2. **Per-backend setting**: Use the `request_proportion` field in the backend configuration file to override the global setting for individual backends.

For example, if you set the `-proxy.secondary-backends-request-proportion` CLI flag to `1.0`, then all requests are sent to all backends.
Alternatively, if you set the `-proxy.secondary-backends-request-proportion` CLI flag to `0.2`, then 20% of requests are sent to all backends, and the remaining 80% of requests are sent only to your preferred backend.

> Per-backend request proportions take precedence over the global setting. In the configuration example above, `prometheus-warm` would receive 80% of requests and `prometheus-cold` would receive 50% of requests, regardless of the global setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Per-backend request proportions take precedence over the global setting. In the previous configuration example, `prometheus-warm` would receive 80% of requests and `prometheus-cold` would receive 50% of requests, regardless of the global setting.
```

#### Time-based routing

You can configure backends to only serve queries based on the time range of the requested data using the `min_time_threshold` setting. This is useful for implementing tiered storage architectures where different backends store data for different time periods.

**How time-based routing works:**

- A backend with `min_time_threshold: "24h"` will only serve queries where the minimum query time is within the last 24 hours

> - A backend with `min_time_threshold: "0s"` (the default) will serve all queries regardless of their time range

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A backend with `min_time_threshold: "0s"` (the default) serves all queries regardless of their time range
```

- The preferred backend is always included regardless of its time threshold

> - For range queries (`/api/v1/query_range`), the earliest time between `start` and `end` parameters is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Range queries, meaning`/api/v1/query_range`, use earliest time between the `start` and `end` parameters.
```

- For instant queries (`/api/v1/query`), the `time` parameter is used, or current time if not specified

> **Example scenario:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example:
```

> - For instant queries (`/api/v1/query`), the `time` parameter is used, or current time if not specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Instant queries, meaning `/api/v1/query` use, the `time` parameter or, if not specified, the current time.
```

With the configuration example above:

> - Recent queries (< 6 hours old) → sent to `prometheus-main` and `prometheus-hot` only (excludes `prometheus-cold`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Recent queries (< 6 hours old) are sent to `prometheus-main` and `prometheus-hot` only. This excludes `prometheus-cold`.
```

> - Old queries (> 6 hours old) → sent to all backends (`prometheus-main`, `prometheus-hot`, and `prometheus-cold`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Old queries (> 6 hours old) are sent to all backends, `prometheus-main`, `prometheus-hot`, and `prometheus-cold`
```

> - Old queries (> 6 hours old) are sent to all backends, `prometheus-main`, `prometheus-hot`, and `prometheus-cold`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Old queries (> 6 hours old) are sent to all backends, meaning `prometheus-main`, `prometheus-hot`, and `prometheus-cold`.
```

#### Time-based routing

You can configure backends to only serve queries based on the time range of the requested data using the `min_time_threshold` setting. This is useful for implementing tiered storage architectures where different backends store data for different time periods.

**How time-based routing works:**

- A backend with `min_time_threshold: "24h"` will only serve queries where the minimum query time is within the last 24 hours
- A backend with `min_time_threshold: "0s"` (the default) will serve all queries regardless of their time range
- The **preferred backend is always included** regardless of its time threshold
- For range queries (`/api/v1/query_range`), the earliest time between `start` and `end` parameters is used
- For instant queries (`/api/v1/query`), the `time` parameter is used, or current time if not specified

**Example scenario:**

With the configuration example above:

- Recent queries (< 6 hours old) → sent to `prometheus-hot`, `prometheus-warm`, and `prometheus-cold`
- Medium queries (6h to 30 days old) → sent to `prometheus-warm` and `prometheus-cold` only

> - Old queries (> 30 days old) → sent to `prometheus-cold` only (plus preferred backend if different)

Reviewer 3: There's something I don't quite get from the examples, I think there might be some typos or I am not following the logic. For example wouldn't `(< 6 hours old)` go to `prometheus-cold` only? 

AFAIU we only discard a request for a backend if it's too recent, not if it's too old. I think one thing that might be causing confusion is `prometheus-cold` is configured to serve all, while `prometheus-hot` serves only 6h-old data.
